Hello, my name is Chantal Chartrand, my mom is Innu and my dad is a Quebecer.
My mom is from Maliotenam, a small village near Sept-Îles.
I've been working in government for almost 30 years now.
I have worked in several departments.
I am currently in the last stages of my career, which I will possibly end with Correctional Services.
I say possibly because in life, one never knows.
Retiring at such a young age can lead to a lot of other things,
and this won't stop after I retire, but I work in Correctional Service
as a development officer with the Indigenous community.
As a child at school, I remember that there was a lot of racism.
Unfortunately, often thoughout my life and specifically during my youth,
I very often thought about ending my life because I was Indigenous,
an Innu, and because others made me feel different.
This was a really difficult time in my life, but looking back,
I see that it really grounded me and gave me the strength that I have today
to change things, to make the world a better place.
These were not values that I appreciated when I was young, I didn't like to feel so different.
My mom, having married a Quebecer, she lost her Indian status,
so at a very young age my mom was already fighting for her rights,
to regain her rights as an Indigenous woman.
So I remember going to protests with her at a very young age
and I didn't understand the magnitude of this issue at that time,
but my thirst for activism started very, very young.
I have always grown up in my culture, but at home, we still lived in a little bit of secrecy.
For example, an event I remember from my youth was when friends came to our house and we ate caribou.
At home, everyone was welcome and made to feel at home.
We shared food with others as long as there was some.
And I remember these people coming to our home and seeing the caribou head
and the next day, it went around school that I was a cannibal.
It was very hurtful.
Afterwards, I think we develop defense mechanisms
because I kept telling myself I am not any different than others,
besides the fact that I have an Innu mother who has all the love and kindess
to welcome others and the spirit of sharing, love and respect.
Then I was made to experience those differences at school.
Later on, when I started my career in government,
it was during the Oka crisis and during that crisis, in the workplace,
people called names like me dirty savage, cigarette seller
even though I had never smoked in my life.
So I thought to myself, my God, this is something.
My colleagues were angry and I found this behaviour very unacceptable
in the work environment because I respected these people.
I understood that there might have been some people living on the south shore (Montreal),
but I found out about the Oka crisis a little later by educating myself
and trying to see what was behind of all this.
In a nutshell, all this has given me a thirst for truth,
a thirst for sharing my culture.
I think this is very important because often,
stereotypes and prejudices stem from misinformation, fear or ignorance.
So, I told myself how can I make a difference,
because obviously, I live my culture 24 hours a day.
When I'm in the workplace, I always think about the consequences or about the communities.
How can I make difference for them?
Because these are my roots, my belonging.